# Ruby

Ruby is a dynamic, object-oriented programming language that stands out for its
elegant and readable syntax. Designed with a focus on developer happiness and
productivity, Ruby's distinguishing features make it a favorite among
programmers. One of its key characteristics is its readability, as its syntax
closely resembles natural language, making it easy for both beginners and
experienced developers to understand and write code. The language's dynamic
typing allows for flexibility by determining variable types at runtime,
contributing to its expressive nature. Everything in Ruby is treated as an
object, even basic data types and functions, promoting consistency and a uniform
programming style.

Ruby's strengths also lie in its metaprogramming capabilities, which empower
developers to modify and extend the language itself. This aspect has led to the
creation of domain-specific languages (DSLs) tailored to specific tasks, further
highlighting Ruby's versatility. One of its primary attractions is its gentle
learning curve, aided by its intuitive syntax and strong community support. This
aspect makes it accessible to those new to programming, enabling them to quickly
grasp its concepts and write functional code.

Originating in the mid-1990s, Ruby was brought to life by Yukihiro Matsumoto,
often known as "Matz." With the first public release in 1995, Matsumoto aimed to
design a language that harmoniously blended functional, procedural, and
object-oriented programming paradigms. Ruby gained substantial popularity in the
early 2000s, largely thanks to the emergence of Ruby on Rails (RoR) in 2004.
Ruby on Rails, a web application framework built on top of Ruby, streamlined web
development and propelled Ruby further into the spotlight.

Ruby's applications are diverse and reflect its adaptability. In web
development, Ruby on Rails simplifies building web applications through its
elegant syntax and conventions. Ruby's scripting capabilities make it ideal for
automation and scripting tasks. The language's concise syntax also lends itself
well to rapid prototyping, enabling quick conceptualization and experimentation.
For graphical user interface (GUI) applications, libraries like Shoes and Tk
allow developers to create interfaces. Additionally, Ruby is employed in game
development, particularly for scripting and crafting small games. Its robust
string manipulation features and regular expression support make it effective
for text processing, and it finds utility in system administration tasks through
the creation of Ruby scripts.

In conclusion, Ruby's combination of elegance, expressiveness, and robust
community support positions it as a versatile programming language suitable for
an array of tasks. Its evolution from a small project in the mid-1990s to a
widely recognized language today speaks to its appeal and enduring relevance in
the world of programming.

## 1. Introduction to Ruby

1. Basics of Ruby Syntax:

   - Understand variables, data types, and basic operations.
   - Learn about strings, numbers, and boolean values.
   - Familiarize yourself with basic operators (+, -, \*, /, %).

1. Control Flow:

   - Learn about if statements and conditional expressions.
   - Explore different types of loops (while, for).

1. Practice Activities:

   - Write simple programs that use variables, perform calculations, and make
     decisions based on conditions.

## 2. Functions and Methods

1. Functions and Methods:

   - Understand the concept of functions (methods in Ruby).
   - Learn how to define and call functions.
   - Explore parameter passing and return values.

1. Scope and Variables:

   - Learn about local and global variables.
   - Understand variable scope within functions.

1. Practice Activities:

   - Create functions for common tasks.
   - Write programs that utilize functions to organize code.

## 3. Data Structures

1. Arrays:

   - Learn how to create and manipulate arrays.
   - Understand common array methods (push, pop, shift, unshift).

1. Hashes (Dictionaries):

   - Explore how to create and work with hashes.
   - Learn about hash methods for manipulation.

1. Iteration and Enumerators:

   - Understand how to iterate over arrays and hashes.
   - Learn about iterators like `each`, `map`, and `select`.

1. Practice Activities:

   - Write programs that involve arrays and hashes.
   - Use iteration to process data stored in arrays and hashes.

## 4. Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) Basics

1. Introduction to OOP:

   - Understand the concepts of classes and objects.
   - Learn about attributes (instance variables) and methods (instance methods).

1. Creating Classes:

   - Learn how to define classes in Ruby.
   - Understand constructor methods (initialize).

1. Inheritance and Polymorphism:

   - Explore the concept of inheritance.
   - Learn about method overriding.

1. Practice Activities:

   - Create simple classes and objects.
   - Implement inheritance and polymorphism in your programs.

## 5. File I/O and Further Exploration

1. Reading and Writing Files:

   - Learn how to read from and write to files in Ruby.
   - Understand file modes and handling exceptions.

1. Modules and Libraries:

   - Explore the use of modules to organize code.
   - Learn how to import and use libraries.

1. Exception Handling:

   - Understand how to handle errors using try-catch blocks.
   - Learn about raising and handling custom exceptions.

1. Practice Activities:

   - Write programs that read from and write to files.
   - Experiment with using modules and libraries to enhance your programs.

Remember that learning a programming language takes time and practice. These
focuses should provide you with a solid foundation in Ruby programming.
Afterward, you can continue to deepen your knowledge and skills by working on
more complex projects and exploring advanced topics.1

## Build something

Here is an idea of a project you can build which should allow you to practise
the skills you have learned in each part of your plan. Remember, this is just a
suggestion and you should feel free to create your own based on what you have
learned.

Certainly! Here's a simple project idea that spans across the 5 days of your
learning plan:

### Project: To-Do List Application

1. Introduction to Ruby

- **Description:** Build a basic command-line to-do list application that allows
  users to add and view tasks.
- **Tasks:**
  - Implement a simple loop to continuously prompt the user for input.
  - Use arrays to store tasks.
  - Implement a basic "add task" functionality using array manipulation.
  - Display the list of tasks to the user.

1. Functions and Methods

- **Description:** Enhance the to-do list application by adding the ability to
  mark tasks as complete and remove tasks.
- **Tasks:**
  - Define functions (methods) for adding, marking, and removing tasks.
  - Use function parameters to pass task details.
  - Incorporate control flow to handle user choices for marking and removing
    tasks.

1. Data Structures

- **Description:** Expand the to-do list application to categorize tasks using
  different lists (e.g., work, personal).
- **Tasks:**
  - Use hashes to store multiple lists of tasks.
  - Allow users to switch between different lists.
  - Modify the add, mark, and remove functions to work with multiple lists.

1. Object-Oriented Programming Basics

- **Description:** Refactor the to-do list application using object-oriented
  programming by creating a Task class.
- **Tasks:**
  - Define a Task class with attributes like description and completion status.
  - Implement instance methods within the Task class for marking and displaying
    tasks.
  - Utilize inheritance to create specialized classes for different list
    categories.

1. File I/O and Further Exploration

- **Description:** Extend the to-do list application by allowing users to save
  and load tasks to/from a file.
- **Tasks:**
  - Implement file I/O to save tasks to a text file.
  - Enable users to load tasks from the saved file upon starting the
    application.
  - Add exception handling to manage potential errors during file I/O.

By building a to-do list application with these progressive features, you'll be
able to practise the skills you've learned each day in a meaningful and
practical context. This project will help you solidify your understanding of
variables, functions, data structures, object-oriented programming, and file I/O
in Ruby. As you work on each task, you'll gain hands-on experience and become
more comfortable with the language and its concepts.
